---
layout: post
title: "My Confusion With Rotten Tomatoes This Summer"
author: "Brandon Walker"
---

This post is about something that's been in the back of my mind for a while now. And after seeing Suicide Squad (despite all the criticism I had been reading) my problem with Rotten Tomatoes has reached its apex. I'm probably going to focus mainly on Suicide Squad during this post/rant, but I'll try to make it clear that this is not the only movie that I think has received a truly unfair tomato score. I'm only focusing on Suicide Squad because I just saw it recently, and think that its score on Rotten Tomatoes is insanely low for the film I watched (who knows, maybe I'll get sidetracked and talk about the other movies more than Suicide Squad, I'm not really sure - I'm just writing off the top of my head right now). Also, I'll try not to get sidetracked and talk about my problem with Captain America: Civil War having a 90% on Rotten Tomatoes (sorry for throwing that in there - that's a post for another time). Anyway, beginning my post...

I know that Rotten Tomatoes is just another crowd-sourced movie review site where approved critics give movies a rating, (either “fresh” or “rotten”), of which there are many (the main three currently being IMDb, Metacritic, and Rotten Tomatoes). Now, none of these can be taken as the "true" score of any movie, because that doesn't exist. Movies are subjective, and it's wonderful that I can love a movie that someone else might hate. However, a lot of the time, I see people solely referencing a Rotten Tomatoes or IMDb ratings as a reason to not go see a movie they had previously been excited for or vice versa. People will state that since a movie is 80% fresh on Rotten Tomatoes, I "have" to watch it because it's "good." My main problem with this mentality is that there is really no way to know if you will enjoy a movie until you go to the theater and _let yourself enjoy the movie_. I am guilty of this all the time; if a film gets poor reviews, I won't want to see it, or I won't let myself be engaged in the film. A big part of movie watching - at least for me - is letting myself be engrossed in the world of the movie. I love when a film can make me feel like I am really part of a dramatic event, comedic scene, epic battle, heartfelt moment, etc. For me, this is the whole point of movies (and storytelling in general). A bad review is the easiest way to deprive a potential viewer of watching a film they might enjoy, or to rip a viewer right out of a story because they're looking for flaws that make the movie "bad." So, this is kind of a background for why I don't like it when movies get unfairly poor reviews.

Moving on to this past summer, it's been disappointing to say the least - for big blockbuster movies anyway. There have been a few good ones, movies that I have simply liked despite my high hopes for them. But I haven't seen a movie this summer that I've _loved_. Some of these movies (and I'm probably forgetting a few), followed by their Rotten Tomatoes score, are: Captain America: Civil War-90%, X-Men: Apocalypse-48%, Star Trek Beyond-84%, Suicide Squad-27%. Now, I'm not going to tell you that Captain America: Civil War wasn't better than Suicide Squad (because it was - it was just a better-made film), and I'm not going to tell you that Marvel is paying critics to bash DC films, because they're not (that's just ridiculous). Instead, I just want to point out a flaw with the Rotten Tomatoes system as I see it. First, I'm going to look at the top rated films here. I thought that Captain America: Civil War and Star Trek Beyond were both pretty safe movies. Both were just another Marvel film, and just another Star Trek film (and I enjoyed both of them). However, I didn't love either of those two films - they both had more than a few problems. But, they both have very high Rotten Tomato scores, especially Civil War which is on par with many Oscar-winning films. The way I see it, Rotten Tomatoes rewards safe films that aren't necessarily amazing but are good. This is because Rotten Tomatoes takes a critic's review, and marks it as "good" or “bad" (“fresh” or “rotten”). However, when you simplify a review to "good" or "bad" you essentially lose the review. Because when you look at a film like Captain America: Civil War, I really don't see how someone could leave the theater thinking that movie was rotten; on the other hand, I had a bunch of problems with the film, and could see many people thinking it was an average Marvel Film (and the same for Star Trek Beyond - sorry, I tried not to get into my problems with Captain America: Civil War, but I thought it was a slightly better example than Star Trek Beyond - I'll get back on track now). This kind of safe filmmaking lends itself well to Rotten Tomato scores, even when the films are not as good as their scores would have you think. If fifty critics think that a blockbuster is simply fine and give it a 6/10, then the movie will have a 100% on Rotten Tomatoes, and this is the underlying problem behind the site. This fact wouldn't bother me as much if more divisive films like X-Men Apocalypse and Suicide Squad weren't getting such poor reviews on Rotten Tomatoes.

This disparity gets on my nerves when the cast of Suicide Squad seemed to really bond over their movie and enjoy making it. From what I've seen, they've been defending their film from criticism left and right. And, I think it's sad seeing their hard work get an (I think) undeservingly bad reputation from a site that now holds such a sway in people's opinions. The other day, I chose to go see Suicide Squad because I had seen the trailers and had been really excited for the movie until the onslaught of reviews came in. And I can say that I was honestly surprised by the movie. Maybe it was because my expectations had been lowered to the floor, but I had a fun time with Suicide Squad. It definitely wasn't as good as Civil War, but I can honestly say that I was happy I spent money to go see the film in the theater. It even had a few moments that I really loved. I thought the movie was riddled with problems, and the climactic fight scene at the end was atrocious; but, despite everything wrong with the movie, I thought that there were a lot of positives, and I left it thoroughly entertained. And with X-Men: Apocalypse, I actually enjoyed the movie and thought it was great (can you imagine that? Thinking a 48% movie was great?). I think X-Men Apocalypse has been my favorite blockbuster movie this summer (over Civil War ~ audible gasp ~) and I don't understand how it has a 48% on Rotten Tomatoes. It definitely had problems - mainly with the villain - but I don't understand how it such a low score. Now, I told you my theory about why I think movies get inflated reviews from Rotten Tomatoes, but I don't have a mathematical theory for why films get undeservingly bad reviews. This is just due to the nature of people and polarizing movies. Plus, the disparity between the adequate movies with 80%'s and other adequate (or good) movies with 50%'s make the 50%'s look even lower. This brings me to my final negative with Rotten Tomatoes: that there seems to be little middle ground when these kinds of blockbusters are reviewed. A movie is either "fresh" or "rotten," and this lack of middle ground reflects the flaws in the site's review process. Movies aren't just "good" or “bad”; it's not that simple, and there are lots of "rotten" movies that I think are worth checking out even though they have a "bad" rating.

As a final note, I want to touch on a positive of Rotten Tomatoes: the Rotten Tomatoes review process is _fair_. It is representative of the critics who have reviewed the film (and if you look at the smaller text "average rating" you will see the actual average rating of all their critics - but unfortunately most people don't reference this and it isn’t even on their mobile app). But, while this review process is _fair_, I don't think it is _just_. And I wanted to point out the problem that I have with Rotten Tomatoes. So this rant kind of morphed into more of a PSA. And really, the point I'm trying to make is to watch movies yourself, let yourself be engaged in movies, and _don't let anyone tell you that you can't like a movie_ because just they don't like it or a majority of people don't like it.
